feat: Add Vaadin Portlet documentation (#1283)
vaadin/docs: articles/flow/integrations/portlet/creating-vaadin-portlets.asciidoc

Pluto is a reference implementation for Portlet specification and while good for testing, it should not be used in a production environment.

== Creating a Vaadin Portlet

We have two ways to start the creation of our Vaadin Portlet: starting from scratch or from https://github.com/vaadin/base-starter-flow-portlet[base-starter-flow-portlet] project.
The starter project contains everything needed to quickly create your own Vaadin Portlet, with the code laid out in advance.

In order to become familiar with setting up a Vaadin Portlet project manually, we will start with a simple Vaadin project and convert it into a Vaadin Portlet project below.

=== Setting Up Portlet Project

First, download https://github.com/vaadin/skeleton-starter-flow/tree/v14/[Vaadin base starter]

Next, update your pom.xml:

. Add the following dependencies:
+
.pom.xml additions
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.vaadin</groupId>
    <artifactId>vaadin-portlet</artifactId>

>     <version>1.0.0</version>

Author: For v14 it won't be added. For v23 it will, but it would be a separate forward port work/PR

</dependency>
----
+
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>javax.portlet</groupId>
    <artifactId>portlet-api</artifactId>
    <version>3.0.1</version>
    <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
----

. Add `build-frontend` goal to `vaadin-maven-plugin` as Vaadin Portlet does not work in development mode running webpack-dev-server.

=== Creating the Portlet

In the most basic setup, Vaadin Portlets consist of two classes:

> * A **portlet class**, which `VaadinPortlet` or `VaadinLiferayPortlet` (when running in Liferay)
> * A portlet **view class**, which extend `Component`
> 
> The portlet class acts as the entry point for our Vaadin Portlet application.
> It serves a similar function to a Servlet, but in portlet context.
> 
> The view class is any normal Vaadin component, which is displayed as the contents of our Vaadin Portlet.
> You could use an existing component through extension, composition, or as-is.
> Or just create an entirely new component for your Vaadin Portlet.
> `VaadinPortlet` and `VaadinLiferayPortlet` are a generic classes and take the selected view class as a type parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A **portlet class**, which `VaadinPortlet` or `VaadinLiferayPortlet` (when running in Liferay)
+
The portlet class acts as the entry point for our Vaadin Portlet application.
It serves a similar function to a Servlet, but in portlet context.
* A portlet **view class**, which extend `Component`
+
The view class, that can be any normal Vaadin component, contains the contents of our Vaadin Portlet.
You could use an existing component through extension, composition, or as-is.
Or just create an entirely new component for your Vaadin Portlet.
`VaadinPortlet` and `VaadinLiferayPortlet` are a generic classes and take the selected view class as a type parameter.
```

Author: Done

)
public class MyLiferayPortlet extends VaadinLiferayPortlet<MainView> {

}
----

MyPortlet.java for non-Liferay Portals
[source,java]
----
public class MyPortlet extends VaadinPortlet<MainView> {

}
----

Next, open the `MainView.java`.
Remove both the `@Route` and `@PWA` annotations - those do not make sense for our portlet.

The final code should look something like this:

.MainView.java
[source,java]
----
public class MainView extends VerticalLayout {

    public MainView() {
        Button button = new Button("Click me",
                event -> Notification.show("Clicked!"));
        add(button);
    }
}
----

When a user clicks on the button, a notification with the text "Clicked!" should appear then the lower left corner of the browser window.
Your Vaadin Portlet is almost ready to go - we only need to make it ready for deployment.

=== Setting Portlet Deployment Descriptor

In Portlet 3.0 specification portlet deployment descriptor can be configured in two ways:

- portlet.xml (backwards compatible)
- Annotations (only 3.0)

We will use the portlet.xml to configure our portlet deployment.

> The portlet.xml serves the same purpose as servlet.xml does for servlets.

Author: Yes, should be `web.xml`, thanks

To run Vaadin Portlets in Liferay Portal the following descriptors are also needed:

- `liferay-display.xml` - describes the category the portlet appears under in the `Add` menu of the Liferay's Widgets bar.
- `liferay-portlet.xml` - describes Liferay-specific enhancements for JSR-286 portlets installed on a Liferay Portal server.

Create liferay-display.xml and liferay-portlet.xml under `{project directory}/src/main/webapp/WEB-INF` and add the following contents:

.liferay-display.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE display PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Display 6.2.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-display_6_2_0.dtd">

<display>
    <category name="Vaadin Liferay Portlets">
        <portlet id="MyLiferayPortlet" />
    </category>
</display>
----

.liferay-portlet.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0"?>
<!DOCTYPE liferay-portlet-app PUBLIC "-//Liferay//DTD Portlet Application 7.1.0//EN" "http://www.liferay.com/dtd/liferay-portlet-app_7_1_0.dtd">

<liferay-portlet-app>
    <portlet>
        <portlet-name>MyLiferayPortlet</portlet-name>
        <instanceable>false</instanceable>
    </portlet>
</liferay-portlet-app>
----

> 

Author: Done

=== Setting External Stats URL for Liferay

If your portlet runs in *Liferay Portal*, add the following resource file `flow-build-info.json` into `{project directory}/src/main/resources/META-INF/VAADIN/config` with the contents:

.flow-build-info.json
[source,json]
----
{
    "externalStatsUrl": "/o/vaadin-portlet-static/VAADIN/config/stats.json"
}
----

== Deploying Your Vaadin Portlet

=== Building Vaadin Portlet

In order to build the portlet we just created, we must add some more configuration to the pom.xml.
Vaadin Portlet deployments are packaged into two war files.
One war file contains all the static resources shared by the Vaadin Portlets, and the other war file contains the actual portlets.

> This allows for more complex scenarios where multiple portlets come from separate war files.

Reviewer: Add link to `multi-module-portlets`?

Author: Added

            <goals>
                <goal>war</goal>
            </goals>
            <configuration>
                <primaryArtifact>true</primaryArtifact>
                <packagingExcludes>WEB-INF/classes/META-INF/VAADIN/build/**,VAADIN/</packagingExcludes>
            </configuration>
        </execution>
    </executions>
</plugin>
----

Here we build 2 war files one for the application (all portlets in this project) and one for the static files needed by the portlets (this contains frontend bundle and client engine).

The static war is built as a portal window can only load a single Vaadin bundle and client engine at a time. With this all the portlets on the page can in a simple way use the same static bundle.

==== Configuring Static Resources

If you need to change the name of the static assets war (`vaadin-portlet-static` as default), you can do that via `vaadin.portlet.static.resources.mapping` application property.
For example, if you would like to serve static resources from `vaadin-static-resources.war`, you will need to +

* Rename static war to `vaadin-static-resources` in the pom.xml
* Rename static portlet name in `flow-build-info.json` (if Liferay is used)

> * Pass the value `/vaadin-static-resources/` (for *Liferay Portal*, it would be `/o/vaadin-portlet-resources/`) via the application property to the Vaadin application, that is, on TomCat web server you would:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Pass the value `/vaadin-static-resources/` (for *Liferay Portal*, it would be `/o/vaadin-portlet-resources/`) via the application property to the Vaadin application, that is, on Tomcat web server you would:
```
